Call back?
Uh, no. Yeah, fine. Listen, we need to get a voice level on you. Could you tell us what the weather's like out there?
Now is the time for all good men to come to the aid of the party.
The party's sounding fine.
Okay. Listen, by the way, you know, this is, uh, we edit this show after we tape it, so if you, if you, if there's an interruption, that's fine.
You know, we can just edit it out.
Okay. Um...
Because it's loud as you can.
Okay, can you hear me okay?
Yeah.
Okay, listen, first of all, I wanted to know, uh, did you grow up reading science fiction? Were you a fan?
Yeah, I, uh, I got some old, um, copies of astounding and, uh, F&SF and Galaxy from a couple of college students who are on my paper route.
They gave me about 900 old magazines, which I still have.
So I have volume one number one of a lot of, uh, different, you know, in the first year of F&SF and so forth.
So I started reading in, um, probably in fifth grade.
And, uh, through high school, I, um, contributed to fanzines and I even published a few issues of my own fanzine.
I went to, I think, one science fiction convention.
Met Harlan Ellison and, um, Buck and Juanita Coulson.
Yeah, we thought you might have been a fan just from the way you treated on the air. We weren't sure, though.
Uh-huh.
Uh, well, let me get right to the meat of some of the questions we had.
Um, I guess the tremendous popularity of science fiction and fantasy movies during the summer of 82 and last spring and so forth has been unbelievable and the money they've taken in.
Do you think there's any reason for that popularity?
Uh, yeah, I think that, um, one reason is that science fiction movies are finally getting the special effects that are equal to their content.
Uh, when you would read a science fiction book, you would be able to imagine, uh, astonishing things happening, but then when you would go to the movie, especially, let's say, in the 1950s, when there was the last big science fiction boom, you would see some pretty
transparently awful special effects in most of the movies.
And there were some good ones, some of George Powell's productions, for example, but for the most part, uh, the special effects were laughable.
And so, uh, the movies were not able to do justice to the ideas in the material.
These new science fiction films, uh, starting with, um, well, obviously starting with 2001 and then with Silent Running, which were precursors of the current boom and which for a long time were not followed by any other science, by any other notable science fiction films.
Um, these new films are able to harness enough technology so that the visuals can do justice to the, to the ideas.
Okay, fine. Do you think it's possible to have a science fiction movie which is as great as any other movie, or is it a limited sort of a genre?
Certainly. Um, the British film magazine, Sight and Sound, uh, takes a poll of the world's film critics every ten years to see what are the greatest films of all time.
They've done it in 52, 62, 72, and then they're in the process of doing it again now.
And I fully anticipate that when the tallies are added up, 2001 will be included among the ten greatest films ever made.
Okay, good. Um, do you think E.T. is as good as the money it's taken in indicates?
Uh, the money that E.T. has taken in indicates, um, the nature of the market today.
It was a mass market, very popular family entertainment that came out at summertime with more than a thousand theaters at some point playing the film.
And so it can generate revenues like that because of the nature of the market.
Movie is very good, and I loved it.
And I think it belongs on the same list though, not so much with science fiction movies as with movies like National Velvet, Lassie Come Home, uh, movies about, as many other people have also observed, it's kind of a movie about a boy and his dog in a way.
Uh, it's more of that than science fiction.
I mean, technically, of course it's science fiction, but I think the appeal was not because it was science fiction.
The appeal was because of, uh, identification with this little boy and something that he learns to care for and something that we learn to care for.
What's, uh, what Spielberg got that so captured people's imaginations?
Spielberg has the ability to remember what it was like to be a child.
When I see his movies, and I'm also including, uh, something for example like Raiders of the Lost Art,
I am taken back to the feeling that I had when I would read, uh, pulp science fiction serials in magazines like Trilling Wonder Stories, Starling Stories, and so forth.
And stuff by Haggard and Burroughs and people like that.
He remembers that sense of wonder and is able to communicate it on, and he also remembers what it was like to be a kid.
I think it's interesting that so many of his films have as their, uh, locale, the American suburbs.
And he grew up in a suburb, and you see that suburb in Poltergeist in particular, and in E.T.
Um, what about fantasy as it's distinguished from science fiction?
Have there been any good fantasy movies?
Well, the problem with fantasy is that, um, you know, science fiction is allegedly plausible.
Although we could have a lot of questions about how much, for example, of Star Wars is really plausible.
Fantasy is not supposed to be plausible, but the problem is, um, most fantasy movies seem to be limited to sword and sorcery, uh, types of, you know, Conan the Barbarian, um, the sword and the sorcerer, and movies like that.
Or you get an animated film like Lord of the Rings.
I have not seen, uh, very much of the kind of fantasy, for example, the fantasy and science fiction magazine helped to popularize.
Fantasy in that it has to do with the whimsy of, of magic or impossible things intruding into real life.
Those kinds of movies are hard to do, and, uh, it takes a lot of, it takes a lot of nerve to do them.
It's one thing to have some broad falling out of her leopard skin bikini and some, um, big brood, brood with a sword, you know, and the rippling pectorals and so forth.
But it's another thing, uh, to have the imagination to really create a fantasy.
Yeah, we understand there are two big fantasy movies coming out at Christmas.
Uh, Dark Crystal and Something Wicked this way comes.
Have you, by any chance, seen anything from those?
I haven't seen anything from either one of them except for, uh, some press material.
Okay, just a couple more here. Why, uh, we thought that Blade Runner didn't go over as well as it could have.
Do you think there's any reason for that?
I think the reason for that is that the director never really got interested in the people or androids in his plot.
And, um, the movie was a triumph of set design. It looked great.
It was a very interesting looking vision of the future.
And in particular the notion that, uh, you know, in so many movies or books, um, uh, at least in, you know, we're not talking about maybe people who are really familiar with the whole field of science fiction,
but to the general public, the science fiction future is this wonderful stainless steel and four-mic placed with towers and rockets, uh, jetting around and everybody dressed like a hospital intern and so forth.
And this movie had the imagination to suggest that 40 years from now things are going to be 40 years older.
The pollution is going to be 40 years, uh, worse.
Poverty is going to be 40 years more deeply ingrained.
Crime will be 40 years, um, more ubiquitous and so forth.
That was a very interesting vision.
I do feel, though, that the really interesting thing about Blade Runner and probably about the Philip K. Dick, uh, material that it started from,
was, uh, centered around the question of what is human, you know?
If the memories that I have are not of a life that I lived, does that make them any less my memories?
And Harrison Ford, when I interviewed him, uh, said much the same thing, that that's what attracted him to the material.
The dilemma of which of these people were human and which of these people were not is, as far as their minds were concerned, they all had the same kind of, uh, background to call on.
I think that that theme kind of got lost in the middle of those great special effects.
And if the movie had really been willing to follow through on the value questions that it raised, it might have been a more interesting movie.
Now, the irony is that I think that, uh, one of the reasons it wasn't as successful as it might have been is because it didn't follow through on those questions.
And yet, from what I understand, that material was cut out of the movie because they figured it wouldn't be box office.
It's better just to have the special effects.
Yeah, that's very good. Excellent.
Um, listen, what about the future of science fiction in the movies?
Back in the 50s, there was a big science fiction boom that was reflected in the cinema.
And of course, the last couple of years, there's been a tremendous boom.
Do you think it's peaked out and it's going to go down or is there a great future for science fiction movies?
Uh, this is a different kind of boom than the 50s boom.
For the most part, the exception of movies like Fantastic Planet and Destination Moon, the 50s science fiction boom was a B movie boom.
Most of those pictures were made for double features or for drive-ins.
A lot of them were made by American International on a very low budget.
They were exploitation pictures.
The movies that are being made today are among the all-time top-grossing films ever made, indicating a really deep-seated desire
on the part of the audience to go see them.
Another difference is that in the 50s, to a degree, even though television was around in the 50s,
to a degree, the American people were still going to movies out of habits that they brought over from the pre-television era.
Today, the basic moviegoer is 19 years old and more than half of all moviegoers are under the age of 25.
So you have different demographics in the audience and these younger people have traditionally been more interested in science fiction.
So that I think that the big budget science fiction blockbuster is going to continue to be a phenomenon indefinitely.
Now the question is, what about the little pictures that use a certain amount of imagination?
What about a picture like L.Q. Jones's A Boy and His Dog?
What about a film like the Harvey Kytel picture where the man has the television cameras implanted in his eyes
and he follows around the woman who thinks she's dying of an incurable disease, Bertrand Tavernier directed it.
Can you remember the name?
No, I can't.
Well, I think it's Death Watch.
That's a wonderful science fiction film, basically on an idea.
In other words, there are no special effects in it except the idea that the guy has television eyes, which you can't see, of course.
You get some point of view shots showing what he sees as kind of like a grid or something.
That was a great idea for a movie.
I wonder what the future of those films will be since the big hardware pictures and the mass market pictures seem to be really well established.
I think you might agree with me though that some of the best science fiction material is more suited to a smaller form.
For example, I would love to see a film based on The People by Zena Henderson.
By whom?
Zena Henderson.
Oh yeah, The People stories.
Yeah.
They tried that on television about four or five years ago, if I remember correctly.
Oh really?
Yeah.
That's television.
William Shatner and Kim Darby, and they took a hodge podge of about four or five of her stories and put them together.
Were they any good?
Sort of.
I didn't, I missed that.
I go to the movies and so much that I hardly ever, you know, I'm never at home during prime time.
I'm always out in a movie theater.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, you're right, sometimes they can't show the intimate little things on the in science fiction except on television, like the Electric Grandmother, which was just on PBS.
Yes.
Do you think that maybe the small film just can't make it because they stay so much in the shadow of the big science fiction films?
Well, I think that the problem that Hollywood has always had with any small offbeat picture is they can't figure out how they're going to sell it.
Now, one thing we have to remember is that the two Spielberg hits this summer were inexpensive pictures.
PolarEyes and ET were both brought in for not much more than ten million dollars.
And you know, today the average Hollywood production, the average movie cost between seven and eight million dollars.
So the ten million dollars is not much to spend on a movie.
It seems like a lot, of course, but a ten million dollar picture today.
In many cases could have been made for one or two million dollars ten years ago.
So in a way, Spielberg, with those two pictures, has not spent tons of money.
A boy in his dog does have a life though, sort of an underground midnight movie.
Yeah, that's where all those movies turn up.
Another one of my favorites is Zardaz.
And that plays in the revival theaters, but it never found an audience the first time around.
Okay, I've just got about two more.
Do you think that the public's fascination with science fiction movies is anyway related to, say, the space program,
the realization that we've got to clean up our act or get off the earth or things of that sort?
Um...
No.
No, I don't think so.
I think maybe some of the fascination with 2001 might have been because it came out at a time
when amazing things were happening in space and we were getting ready to land on the moon and so forth.
But I believe that the space movies today, like Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back,
are identified with primarily in the same way that Rage of the Lost Ark is, as a pick-a-resk adventure.
And when we talk about science fiction, I gather that you and I both kind of tacitly did not include horror films.
Right.
I think a psychiatrist might say something like this, or at least I've heard this theory.
It's not so much that the space films indicate our feeling that there's a new frontier to be conquered,
as that the monster films indicate our fear of technology.
And there is an old theory that at any time when mankind, in recent years, in the 20th century,
when people, when the public has begun, has started to feel threatened by the bomb or by technology,
then you get a lot of horror pictures because the messy seems to be science will get out of control.
Science will kill us, you know.
There'll be some kind of a virus or giant grasshoppers or something will happen.
And, you know, scanners or other terrible things will be unleashed upon the population.
Yeah, the science fiction people sort of call out the Frankenstein conflicts.
I think you're, that's probably right.
Yeah, listen, I'll tell you one thing that's happening.
I'm getting awfully bored by the special effects makeup.
You know, it's only been about 18 months since the big breakthroughs of, oh, like American werewolf in London,
and so forth.
And already you can, you know, you get the close up of the face and the job against the pulsate
and then the face begins to expand and there's a face inside trying to get out.
I've seen it now, you know.
I've seen it so many times that it's boring.
I want to get on with the story.
Yeah, do you think that might have been the problem with Carpenters the Thing?
Well, it really had an interesting monster.
But it didn't really have people.
I didn't really feel much concern about the characters in the Thing.
And another thing that bothered me, you know, years ago in science fiction fandom, they had the so-called idiot plot.
The plot that can only last as long as the movie because everyone in the movie is an idiot.
Because if somebody wasn't an idiot, they would figure out what to do and do it.
And in the Thing, the characters have an annoying persistent tendency to not do what everyone in the audience knows they should be doing.
You know, they split up. They go outside.
They say, you stay right here because I know I can take care of myself.
They trust each other.
They do not keep a sense of who was where, when, and why.
In a group of people like that with military discipline, the moment that they figured out what they were up against,
if they had instilled watertight discipline upon themselves, they would have been a lot better off.
But the movie depends upon everybody being an idiot.
That's very good. You're exactly right.
Well, listen, we wanted to ask you before we let you go.
We knew that you were going to be doing a new show, that that PBS one, you were going off of that.
But we haven't got any information about where and when and what.
Well, Gene Siskel and I, last week previews, we started a show called At the Movies.
It has a similar structure. We review new films.
Instead of Spot the Wonder Dog, we now have Aroma the Educated Skunk.
And we are on in 86 markets around the country, including most of the top 50 markets.
Where are you calling from again?
Well, that's the Texas. We picked you up on the PBS channel here from Dallas.
Dallas? We're on in Dallas.
We are on in Dallas, Fort Worth on KTXA. It's Saturday at 3.30 p.m.
No, we don't get KTXA. Dog on it.
Well, maybe one of our stations out here will pick you up.
No, we missed it.
What is the station nearest you?
KMID, K...
What city?
Odessa?
Odessa Midland, KMID and KTPX.
Where's that?
And KOZA. They're all local.
ABCNBC and CBS affiliates here.
They're all in Odessa. I'm looking at this list here.
Odessa Midland. It could be either one. KTPX, KMID.
Is it Desus Lubbock?
No.
What station in Lubbock?
We haven't sold Lubbock.
Oh, okay.
Well, I don't know. We're doing very well. We've gotten three times the ratings that we had before.
Well, your other show was excellent quality. We're going to miss that.
Maybe we can start a little letter writing thing out here, see if we can get a hold of it.
Well, it's called At the Movies and it's put out by Tribune Productions at WGN in Chicago.
Yeah.
And we're very happy. I guess it looks pretty successful from our point of view.
Yeah. Listen, are you going to...
Where's Waco, Texas?
Waco.
What do I know?
I'm from Texas.
Most of the people from Waco are Waco, though.
Oh, I believe that. Anyway, we are... It's called At the Movies and it is on the air.
Okay, and you're going to be staying with the Chicago Sun-Times, all right?
Yeah.
Yeah, okay. Well, listen, we appreciate your time. We know how valuable it must be.
And when we get these edited into our shows, we'll send you copies of the cassettes.
Thanks a lot.
And thank you very much, Mr. Ebert.
You bet. Bye-bye.
Bye-bye.